*Matosinhos, Porto*
Taller Belén Ramos
Three workshop houses for artists
/
The sculptor excitedly recognized the house that Souto de Moura had had built decades ago. When he came upon the estate where he would spend the next summers, everything looked scattered, as if they had been piecing together bits of walls—roofs, empty spaces, and vegetable gardens—gathering them one by one, like someone building a wall with found stones. But little by little, with each alignment, with each new wall raised, a modulated beat of volumes was revealed, recognizing in it the dynamic character of Matosinhos's narrow streets, roofs, and boats. The concrete walls, seen almost like centuries-old statues, bore the scars left by rainwater as their upper sections deformed into an open channel, channeling the zinc torrent of the roofs toward the vegetable gardens and the border forest. He was surprised to be greeted by an outdoor space that, without hesitation, revealed the door to workshop, where he would create his new collection. Through a crack, a courtyard distribution area—a modern cloister—opened, granting access to the estate rest rooms. As if he had never left the narrow streets of Matosinhos, he now found himself discovering a small village that, without realizing it, would become his home.

Upon reaching a very bright room, he settled in before moving on to the living room. In that courtyard, protected by walls, he could already envision summer dinners with company. A discreet kitchen complemented the space with a counter that ran through the load-bearing wall, connecting to the exterior courtyard. The sculptor headed for the last room. The workshop was spacious and was laid out between two concrete wallss. He appreciated the texture of the formwork once inside.

This boundary was crossed by a large sliding door, made of veneer and memories of the industrial port, which he had to push with effort. Once he crossed the threshold, a small courtyard unfolded, flanked by the old vegetable gardenss that stretched between the two walls. As he contemplated the scene, he was startled by the cry of his new neighbor, a writer immersed in his novel, who also seemed captivated by the place. He insisted on recording the first impressions this architecture had awakened in him.

//

La cuina es desplega mitjançant peces prefabricades que volen dialogar amb la industrialitat de les cobertes i el port.
The small, fragmented, and mobile modules units can fill the entire space or discreetly retract, freeing up the dining room and adapting to every moment of domestic life.
/

